Explain criteria for selecting multicluster topology (#4725)
istio/istio.io: content/docs/concepts/multicluster-deployments/index.md

For applications up to a certain size, all of the microservices comprising the
application can be running on a single orchestration platform (e.g., Kubernetes cluster).
However, for many reasons such as scale, redundancy, workload isolation, compliance, integration with legacy services,
etc., most applications will eventually need to be distributed and have some of their services running elsewhere.

Istio supports many possible topologies for distributing the services of an
application beyond a single cluster, for example:

* You can use [egress traffic control](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) to allow workloads inside the mesh

>   access standalone external services or to access services exposed by another loosely-coupled service mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to access standalone external services or to access services exposed by another loosely-coupled service mesh.
```

* You can [expand the service mesh](/docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/mesh-expansion/) to include
  services running on VMs or bare metal hosts.
* You can combine the services from more than one cluster into a single composite service mesh.

> * You can create ad-hoc, loosely coupled _federation_ of multiple service meshes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can create ad-hoc, loosely coupled [federation of multiple service meshes](#mesh-federation).
```

## Criteria for selecting the right topology

> When you plan your multi-mesh topology, ask yourself the following questions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you plan your multicluster topology, you first need to decide if you are going to combine the clusters into a
single multicluster mesh or create a federation of multiple meshes. Ask yourself the following questions:
```

**Uniform naming**: Will your meshes have _unoform naming_. In case of multiple Kubernetes clusters, _uniform naming_
means that a service named `foo` in namespace `ns1` of cluster 1 has the same API and semantics as a service named `foo`
in `ns1` of cluster 2.

> **Exposing behavior**: Will your combined meshes expose all their services one to another, or selective exposure is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Exposing behavior**: Will your combined clusters expose all their services one to another, or selective exposure is
```

> required? _Selective exposure_ means that the owner of mesh 1 may want to control which services they expose to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required? _Selective exposure_ means that the owner of cluster 1 may want to control which services they expose to the
```

> workloads in mesh 2. Selective exposure may be required for security or compliance reasons. Some security standards

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workloads in cluster 2. Selective exposure may be required for security or compliance reasons. Some security standards
```

require exposure of services on the need-to-know basis.

> **Isolation for security or compliance**: Are you required to control all the traffic that enters your mesh **at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Isolation for security or compliance**: Are you required to control all the traffic that enters your cluster **at the
```

point of entrance**, for example at the Ingres Gateway?

> **Common trust**: Can you setup a common CA root for your meshes? Will you perform authentication by Istio

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Common trust**: Can you setup a common CA root for your clusters? Will you perform authentication by Istio
```

[mutual TLS](/docs/concepts/security/#mutual-tls-authentication) or will you use access tokens like
[JWT](https://istio.io/docs/concepts/security/#origin-authentication)?

**Operating multiple control planes**: Do you have infrastructure capabilities to manage multiple Istio control planes
or do you prefer to manage a single control plane for multiple clusters?

**Providing access to Kubernetes APIs**: Are you allowed to provide access to Kubernetes APIs of one cluster to
other clusters?

> **Sending telemetry to external meshes**: Are you allowed to send telemetry data from your mesh to other meshes, from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Sending telemetry to external meshes**: Are you allowed to send telemetry data from your cluster to other clusters, from
```

> the security or compliance point of view? In particular, are your pods allowed to communicate with external meshes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the security or compliance point of view? In particular, are your pods allowed to communicate with external clusters
```

For applications up to a certain size, all of the microservices comprising the
application can be running on a single orchestration platform (e.g., Kubernetes cluster).

> However, for many reasons such as scale, redundancy, workload isolation, compliance, integration with legacy services,

Author: @rcaballeromx I am OK with the proposed change, however, please note that this is an advanced section. In general, people who work with Istio should understand what are distributed applications and microservices. Even more so, the people who want to distribute their applications among multiple clusters.

> However, for many reasons such as scale, redundancy, workload isolation, compliance, integration with legacy services,

Author: @rcaballeromx I removed the link you provided for "distribute". Note that there are two kinds of distribution:
1. Partition one application into microservices inside a single cluster. This is the basic use of Istio.
2. Distributing the microservices from the previous partition among multiple clusters. This is the advanced use case, the document talks about this kind of distribution.

etc., most applications will eventually need to be distributed and have some of their services running elsewhere.

Istio supports many possible topologies for distributing the services of an
application beyond a single cluster, for example:

> * You can use [egress traffic control](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) to allow workloads inside the mesh

Author: @rcaballeromx Service entries are configuration artifacts that you apply as part of egress traffic control. It is a low-level mechanics how to achieve egress traffic control. Even more so, for **secure** control of egress traffic, service entries are not enough - you have to use an egress gateway, a virtual service and destination rules.

* You can combine the services from more than one cluster into a single composite service mesh.
* You can combine autonomous service meshes in multiple clusters into a loosely coupled [federation of service meshes](#mesh-federation).

## Criteria for selecting the right topology

When you plan your multicluster topology, you first need to decide if you are going to combine the clusters into a
single multicluster mesh or create a federation of multiple meshes. Ask yourself the following questions:

**Uniform naming**: Will your meshes have _uniform naming_. In case of multiple Kubernetes clusters, _uniform naming_
means that a service named `foo` in namespace `ns1` of cluster 1 has the same API and semantics as a service named `foo`
in `ns1` of cluster 2.

**Exposing behavior**: Will your combined clusters expose all their services one to another, or selective exposure is
required? _Selective exposure_ means that the owner of cluster 1 may want to control which services are exposed to the
workloads in cluster 2. Selective exposure may be required for security or compliance reasons. Some security standards
require exposure of services on the need-to-know basis.

> **Isolation for security or compliance**: Are you required to control all the traffic that enters your cluster **at the

Author: @rcaballeromx This part is tricky. Consider this scenario: service A in cluster 1 calls service B in cluster 2. The policy of the organization is that only service A may call service B.

You can control which services may call service B and to enforce the policy in three ways:

1. Let service B check who calls it and enforce the policy. The ingress gateway just passes through the requests to services in cluster 2 without any checks.
1. Let an ingress gateway of cluster 2 check who calls a service in cluster 2 and enforce the policy.
1. Use a combination of 1 and 2, and perform double enforcement (the defense- in-depth principle).

Isolation means 2 or 3 - this is what the security standards require. 1 means regular policy enforcement, the same as within a single cluster.

Please note that this is an advanced concept, which is important for advanced users. If we leave it out, the advanced users will miss this security aspect.

point of entrance**, for example at the Ingres Gateway?

> **Common trust**: Can you setup a common CA root for your clusters? Will you perform authentication by Istio

Author: @rcaballeromx There are two questions:
1. Will you perform authentication by Istio mutual TLS or by access tokens?
1. If you will perform authentication by Istio mutual TLS, will you be able to share the certificate authority (CA) root for Citadels in different clusters? 

This question is advanced and requires understanding of PKI - how certificate authorities work and what is common CA root. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Root_certificate

[mutual TLS](/docs/concepts/security/#mutual-tls-authentication) or will you use access tokens like
[JWT](https://istio.io/docs/concepts/security/#origin-authentication)?

**Operating multiple control planes**: Do you have infrastructure capabilities to manage multiple Istio control planes
or do you prefer to manage a single control plane for multiple clusters?

> **Providing access to Kubernetes APIs**: Are you allowed to provide access to Kubernetes APIs of one cluster to

Author: _ *Does a cluster in your deployment access the Kubernetes APIs of the other clusters?**_ this is not the question. Shared Control Plane Mesh in Istio requires access from the cluster with the control plane to Kubernetes APIs of other clusters. The question is: are you OK to provide such access? From the security, compliance, organization procedures point of view.

other clusters?

> **Sending telemetry to external meshes**: Are you allowed to send telemetry data from your cluster to other clusters, from

Author: @frankbu proposed to stick to clusters instead of meshes. The question is not "does your cluster send telemetry data to another cluster?". The Shared Control Plane implementation of Istio requires this sending. The question is: "are you OK with that"? From security, compliance, procedures point of view.

The second question is are you OK that your pods access the other cluster directly, without going through some egress gateways in your clusters? In some environments, the outgoing traffic is allowed only through specific pods.

the security or compliance point of view? In particular, are your pods allowed to communicate with external clusters
directly?

The following decision diagram instructs you on choosing the correct topology based on the answers to the questions
above:

{{< image width="80%"

>     link="./multicluster-patterns.png"

Author: @rcaballeromx I agree regarding your remarks about the decision tree, however, from what I saw the convention is to use the same shape and color for `yes` and `no` arrows to show that both alternatives are equal. Sometimes, the selected decision is marked by bold arrows. See https://chunml.github.io/ChunML.github.io/tutorial/Decision-Tree/, the second and third decision trees.

For applications up to a certain size, all of the microservices comprising the
application can be running on a single orchestration platform (e.g., Kubernetes cluster).

> Eventually, you will need to distribute most applications and run some or all of their services elsewhere due to one or more of the following reasons:

Reviewer 2: you may need to

Author: fixed in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4725/commits/773418edeb80c4779cfacc6df551cb540119560d

- Integration with legacy services

Istio supports many possible topologies for distributing the services of an
application beyond a single cluster, for example:

- You can use [egress traffic control](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) to allow workloads inside the mesh
  to access standalone external services or to access services exposed by another loosely-coupled service mesh.
- You can [expand the service mesh](/docs/setup/kubernetes/additional-setup/mesh-expansion/) to include
  services running on VMs or bare metal hosts.
- You can combine the services from more than one cluster into a single composite service mesh.
- You can combine autonomous service meshes in multiple clusters into a loosely coupled [federation of service meshes](#mesh-federation).

## Single multicluster service mesh or mesh federation?

As you plan your multicluster topology, you need to determine if you should combine the clusters into
[a single multicluster mesh](#multicluster-service-mesh) or create [a federation of multiple meshes](#mesh-federation).
To make that decision, ask yourself the following questions:

1. Do you enforce **{{< gloss >}}uniform naming{{< /gloss >}}** in your clusters?

> 1. Do you want your combined clusters to **expose** all their services to each other? Due to compliance or security

Reviewer 3: With the new Sidecar API it is possible to restrict service exposure using namespaces, rather than meshes. So this may no longer be a decision point for whether you need multiple meshes.

Author: I do not think Sidecar API can serve as a security measure. The security requirement, I guess, is that all the incoming traffic to the cluster is denied by default. You have to specify explicitly which services you expose. With Sidecar API - everything is exposed by default.

Reviewer 3: That seems like the same question as the control all traffic that enters question then?

All I'm pointing out is that it isn't a requirement of a mesh that all services are exposed to each other, that is just the default (and a default we can support changing).

The primary issue is actually more about namespace vs. cluster isolation. If namespace isolation is good enough, a single mesh will work, if you need cluster isolation, you need multiple meshes.

   reasons, you might need {{< gloss >}}selective service exposure{{< /gloss >}}.

> 1. Are you required to **control all the traffic that enters your cluster**?

Reviewer 3: Can we clarify this? I'm not entirely sure what control means here, maybe examples or some more specific wording?

Author: This is a defense-in-depth/compliance requirement: you have to put a "firewall" at the entrance to your cluster and explicitly control who can call specific services in your cluster. Ingress gateway can function as such a firewall, in my opinion. This is in addition to the RBAC policies inside the cluster. In the current, single mesh implementations, the passthrough gateways allow all the traffic in. This cannot satisfy, for example, PCI DSS compliance, which requires network segmentation + a firewall between Cardholder Data Environment and other environments, in particular between Cardholder Data Environment and DMZ network.

Reviewer 3: OK, I think I'm a bit thrown off by the word cluster.

In my model if we think about groups of clusters that need to be isolated, each of those are a mesh, so this is about controlling all traffic that enters some subset of clusters, not necessarily each cluster. Maybe we can reword to be about groups and use an example of requiring firewalling between environments, and each environment should be its own mesh.

> 1. Will you be able to set **common CA root** for the Citadels running in your clusters?

Reviewer 3: This restriction will go away soon (1.3 or 1.4), we'll support multiple roots in a single mesh with a single trust bundle for the entire mesh.

The more specific question is whether the clusters trust each others' roots. We can reword once that stuff is in place though, but maybe put something in that we're working on lifting this restriction?

Author: @smawson I propose to capture the current situation as it is on istio.io. Then to iterate on it, once new features/patterns are introduced/removed/simplified.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough, would still like some forward-looking verbiage since we're working on it and this isn't inherent in "what is a mesh".

A multicluster service mesh has the advantage that all the services look the same to clients,
regardless of where the workloads are actually running. It's transparent
to the application whether it's deployed in a single or multicluster service mesh.
To achieve this behavior, a single logical control plane needs to manage all services,
however, the single logical control plane doesn't necessarily need to be a single physical
Istio control plane. There are three possible deployment approaches:

1. Multiple dedicated Istio control planes that have replicated service and routing configurations.

1. A shared Istio control plane that can access and configure the services in more than one cluster. The services are
   directly reachable from all the workloads in all the clusters.

1. The same as the previous approach, but with services reachable through connected gateways.

To select the correct topology, ask yourself the following questions:

1. Do you require **a single control plane?**. Managing multiple Istio control planes
  requires different infrastructure capabilities to those needed to manage a single
  control plane. Be certain of your preference when planning your topology.

> 1. Are you allowed by the security procedures in your organization to provide **access to Kubernetes APIs** of one

Reviewer 2: allowed/permitted throughout document

Author: Why is permitted better than allowed? I checked PCI DSS v3.2.1 compliance document, allow appears on 40 pages, permit on 10 pages.

Some examples:
Allow:
_1.3.4 Do not allow unauthorized outbound traffic from the cardholder data environment to the Internet._
_1.1.6.b Identify insecure services, protocols, and ports allowed; and verify that security features are documented for each service._

Permit:
_1.3.5 Permit only “established” connections into the network._
_User interfaces that do not permit access to unauthorized functions._

Reviewer 2: ya - makes sense.  thanks.

   cluster to other clusters?

> 1. Are you allowed by the security procedures in your organization to **send telemetry data from one cluster to other

Reviewer 3: Can we drop the "by the security procedures in your organization" part? Seems unnecessary.

Potential rewording:

In your organization, is one cluster allowed to **provide access to Kubernetes APIs** to other clusters?
In your organization, is one cluster allowed to **send telemetry data to other clusters**?

Seems less accusatory than the current language.

Author: @smawson Agreed, I can make the language less accusatory.

   clusters**?

> 1. Are the services in your clusters **directly reachable** from all the workloads in all other the clusters?

Reviewer 3: This seems irrelevant? Network reachability is unrelated to how many *logical* control planes there should be. We're conflating networking and isolation.

Author: This question is to select between single network shared control plane topology and multiple networks shared control plane topology. It is a question of networking to choose between the two, isolation is the same in both cases.

Reviewer 3: Exactly, we should separate the question of isolation from the question of networking. This section should be about how many logical control planes you need, and separately there should be a section on how many networks you have/need.

however, the single logical control plane doesn't necessarily need to be a single physical
Istio control plane. There are two possible deployment approaches:

> 1. Multiple dedicated Istio control planes that have replicated service and routing configurations.

Author: @frankbu and I introduced this term into this document, see Dedicated Control planes in this document, merged in preliminary.istio.io. See  https://preliminary.istio.io/docs/concepts/multicluster-deployments/#dedicated-control-plane-topology.

Dedicated control plane means: each cluster uses its own control plane. Each control plane manages only the cluster it runs in. This is the opposite of shared control plane: clusters can use control planes in other clusters. A control plane can manage multiple clusters.

> 1. Multiple dedicated Istio control planes that have replicated service and routing configurations.

Reviewer: Dedicated == not shared. This is terminology that will potentially change before we release this to istio,io, but I agree it ultimately needs to be clearly defined if we stick with the term.

> 1. Multiple dedicated Istio control planes that have replicated service and routing configurations.

Reviewer 3: I don't love the "dedicated" terminology either, let's try to come up with something better if we can.

I also don't like the binary choice here (although there is a third choice which seems unrelated).

I like the way the federation section is written, which is basically "do you need multiple meshes". So let's think about how we can phrase this into a "how isolated do you need your control planes to be" question.

To me this is a continuum, at one end of the spectrum, every cluster has its own control plane. At the other end of the spectrum, there is a single *logical* control plane for the entire mesh. Each control plane itself may be replicated, which doesn't make sense at the "every cluster has its own control plane" end of the spectrum but makes sense everywhere else.

If we want to think about this like the federation question, either you need a "federation of control planes" or you have a single shared *logical* control plane.

So series of questions:
- Do you need more than one logical control plane? Here are questions to ask yourself to answer that.
- If you have fewer control planes than clusters, do you need them to be HA?

Also networking should be its own section, we shouldn't throw in the "oh do you need multi network too" here.

From top down then the questionnaire is:
- How many meshes do you need?
- How many *logical* control planes do you need?
  - For each *logical* control plane, how many replicas do you need?
- How many networks do you need?

In my mind the "dedicated" moniker is just at one extreme of the question of how many *logical* control planes. It doesn't deserve special status, just like we don't have special status for a federation of single cluster meshes (dedicated meshes?).

> 1. Multiple dedicated Istio control planes that have replicated service and routing configurations.

Reviewer: @smawson, "dedicated" means more than just one logical control plane per cluster. It's a fundamentally different question from "how many control planes". Consider the case of a 2 cluster multicluster mesh. If I want to have 2 logical control planes, I could choose to configure it with either 2 dedicated control planes or 2 shared control planes.

With 2 dedicated control planes, each cluster has its own control plane dedicated to the services running in that cluster. In the 2 shared control planes topology, each cluster has a local control plane but the applications in each cluster can also be controlled by the shared control plane in the other cluster.

Both approaches are HA in the sense that there are multiple clusters capable of running the app. I suppose the shared control plane topology has more HA in that if one of the control planes goes down, application services in the same cluster can still function using the remote control plane.

So, in addition to "how many control planes", I think there needs to be some kind of question about which clusters are sharing each control plane (0 -> dedicated). Maybe this is an "HA control plane", as opposed to "HA mesh", question?

To configure this type of multicluster topology, visit our
[multi-network shared control plane instructions](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/multicluster/shared-gateways/).

## Mesh Federation

> Mesh federation is ad-hoc, loosely coupled composition of services running in multiple meshes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mesh federation is an ad-hoc, loosely coupled composition of services running in multiple meshes.
```

To configure this type of multicluster topology, visit our
[multi-network shared control plane instructions](/docs/setup/kubernetes/install/multicluster/shared-gateways/).

## Mesh Federation

Mesh federation is an ad hoc, loosely coupled composition of services running in multiple meshes.
It exhibits the following characteristics
(see [Criteria for selecting the right topology](#criteria-for-selecting-the-right-topology)):

1. No uniform naming is assumed.
1. Selective exposure: the mesh operators decide which services to expose to other meshes. By default, no service is
exposed.
1. Ingress Gateways control the incoming traffic from the coupled meshes.
1. Common CA root between Citadel instances in the federated meshes is optional.

> You can achieve mesh federation by applying Istio [Ingress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To create a mesh federation, configure traffic control for [ingress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/) and
```

> [Egress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) traffic control in your service meshes and by specifying the services

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[egress](/docs/tasks/traffic-management/egress/) traffic in your service meshes and specify which services
```

> you expose in one mesh and consume in other meshes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
to expose in one mesh and which to consume in the other meshes.
```
